it's scary if your boundary is sort of
accepted and the person loves you in
your boundary because then that means
that your the way that you have modeled
the world in the past has to now change
yes and that means you have to change
welcome to the art of accomplishment
where we explore how deepening
connection with ourselves and others
leads to creating the life we want with
enjoyment and ease
hey welcome back to the show today we're
going to try something a little bit
different we've been getting a lot of
questions from the community on Circle
and direct messages about boundaries so
today my nesting partner Alexa is going
to interview Joe with a number of
questions that come up commonly around
boundaries
so hi Joe Hi how are you Alexa I'm great
good do we want to tell everybody who
you are and what makes you what makes us
have a podcast with you uh sure it'd be
good for me to know anyway
well
I'm Alexa Anderson for about the last
decade
I've been doing design research and
strategy
so helping my clients mostly big
corporate clients and teams of big
corporations
to sort of ask better questions and make
big decisions
since pandemic I'm pivoting to doing
coaching
also I've worked with you Joe and that's
been really amazing
and I would consider myself to be part
of a community of people who are doing
this kind of work and
trying to live into some of these ways
of being a person in the world I'm glad
you're here I'm glad you'll be asking
questions I understand that the
questions are around boundaries today
yeah what made you want to ask me
questions around boundaries
what was the cause of it
this topic but I do feel like I didn't I
don't oh wow let's start there do you
have a boundary around that
did you want to talk about something
else what would your choice no I do
think this is an exciting topic and I do
think that the topic sort of like chose
us or chose the podcast all right um I
know that people from the last class
really had some open questions about
boundaries and had been hoping that
y'all would do a podcast about
boundaries okay cool yeah we've done one
so this is this would be a follow-up
it's great I think we've done one we
have we done one Have you listened to
one I don't remember there being one and
I'm pretty sure I've listened to all of
them okay wow um boundaries come up
sometimes okay a lot of things you talk
about but I don't think you've done a
podcast all about boundaries before all
right well fantastic let's do it I love
it and I love the idea so it was it was
something that's come out of a lot of
you being a part of the group you've
seen the group want wanting to do it and
talk about it and there being a a lack
of it in the in the work so far so that
I'm really grateful that you're paying
attention like that and that you
that you're that you're letting it
choose you and you're listening that way
thanks thanks Joe yeah yeah okay
so where do you want to start well
I do think you have a really interesting
definition of boundaries yeah and I
think it's a little bit different than
how a lot of people think about it so do
you want to start by just telling us how
you think about boundaries yeah so
boundaries that are super effective both
for you and for the people you're with
are effective because they're not part
of the power Dynamic they're not part of
like a fear dynamic
where somebody's trying to get control
over another person
a boundary when it's
it used optimally increases your
capacity to love somebody the person who
you're drawing the boundary with and it
um empowers you so that you see that
it's your own
um
it's your own choice at your own choice
and you get to make that choice
and so
the way that I do that is if you think
about a boundary that you want to draw
with somebody which is
it does two things one if you when you
think about saying it to them it
immediately allows you to love them more
deeply just the saying it just the
saying it no matter what their reaction
is maybe their reaction is [__] you and
maybe their reaction is oh thank God you
said that it doesn't matter whatever it
is when you say it Your Capacity to love
them has increased
and then the second thing a good
boundary does is it doesn't tell them
what to do it tells them what you're
going to do so it's never about
controlling of the other person
so uh
so let's say this is one that comes up a
lot for people who are dealing with any
kind of abuse in their life
often a really great boundary there is
hey if you're going to yell at me I'm
going to ask you to stop yelling at me
if you continue to yell at me I'm going
to leave
and 30 minutes later I'll give you a
call and if you're ready to talk again
without yelling at me I'm happy to
re-engage
that would be an example of a boundary
so it's not asking them to do anything
any differently but you're immediately
able to love them because you more
because you're not accepting some sort
of behavior that's belittling to you
it's really hard to love something that
can dominate you
that does dominate you so it's an
incredibly difficult thing and if you
think about
boundaries in love there's no
there's no
iconic figure of love there's no Paragon
of love that doesn't isn't really
strongly boundary whether that's like a
great mom or Martin Luther King or
Mother Teresa all of these people were
incredibly boundaried so boundaries are
part of what makes a loving relationship
it creates trust I really like that
definition boundaries that make more
room for love Yeah it can't exist
without it
and I think the thing that makes that so
hard for people to grab hold of is that
love is often conflated with caretaking
I know we did a podcast on caretaking
but love is often conflated meaning like
loving is conflated with being nice
loving is being you know making sure the
other person doesn't get mad I think is
actually what it is it's like oh if I've
loved them then they can't be mad and
actually compassion can really [__]
piss people off when when you can be
very compassionate with somebody and
they can get really really upset with
that
that's what makes it compassionate it
means that you're willing to take
their anger because it's what's right
for them like that's not what makes it
compassionate but that is like the the
harder compassion to have is to suffer
for The Compassion or apparently suffer
for the compassion it's not actually
ever suffering
but it really feels like you're gonna
when you're thinking about doing it
um it strikes me that there's this way
you said that like
the compassionate things that you're
willing to take their anger
I think I I don't disagree but the way I
would say it is something like
the compassionate thing is being willing
to accept their anger yeah that's a
better way to say it I would say most
accurately probably is to love their
anger you might not take it and you
might tell them that they need to leave
but you can be in love with their anger
that it doesn't you're not avoiding it
yeah yeah nice catch
well so the other thing that's coming up
for me is I think that there is a like a
really big
mental changeover that happens when
people understand
it's just like several of the building
blocks you're referring to
and then change from being a person who
um considers the right thing to do in a
relationship to be
you know this like making sure the other
person isn't mad kind of niceness right
yeah to being the kind of person who's
like the really compassionate thing to
do here is
to say what's real for me even if that
makes them upset making them not upset
would be things like walking on
eggshells uh caretaking them doing
things for them that build resentment
for you
bending what you want to because they'll
be happier
Etc and all that does in a relationship
is continue to create resentment and a
sense of obligation and then in a sexual
relationship that resentment becomes
very kind of Parental child like one's
As a caretaker and then the sex dies
it's like it's a horrible Loop and so
when everybody is in these horrible
relationships and they're like well I've
given everything that I can give to this
person and they still don't you know
blah blah blah tried and
or you know I don't know what I have to
do to make her happy or him happy or
it's like be yourself like and the only
thing that people aren't trying is like
just be yourself be authentic show up as
you
and don't don't try to change them I do
think a trap that people fall into is
feeling like but I authentically want
them to be happy though right right but
that's not right that's beautifully put
so
that's trying to change somebody
like
the in a relationship that the state
that creates the most freedom in my
system is where I can love the person
unconditionally that I don't need them
to be different than what they are
and obviously that Ebbs and flows to
different level levels of subtlety but
the and that's why a boundary I'm not
defining a boundary as
you have to do this because that's
changing them
it's just saying what you're gonna do
and if you're not capable of loving
somebody for
who they are
then what that really means is that
you're uncapable incapable of loving
that part of yourself I really want them
to be happy means I can't love my own
sadness
I really want them to be
um
you know more faithful to me
is it's like it's like there's some part
of yourself that can't love
either and or your
your desires that are outside of the
relationship or the love yourself in a
way that you can get what you deserve so
all of it is just this reflection
anytime you want someone else to be
different
it's a reflection of a way you can't
love yourself and this is where it gets
really confusing with boundaries is that
people hear that and they go oh so if I
love them then I'll accept that
no you might not you might be like I
love you just the way you are I
understand that you need to have
um you know sexual relations that don't
work for me
but they don't work for me so if you're
going to have sexual relationships in
this way outside of our relationship
then
I love you but I'm not in the
relationship that's not the relationship
I want yeah and so it's not trying to
change them it's just being clear about
how you're going to respond
and being authentic and truthful to
yourself in that well so that raises
another question for me is it ever
appropriate to try to change someone uh
I don't I don't appropriate means it
kind of assumes like a right or wrong
it's incredibly ineffective
and it doesn't create happiness for
anybody yeah I mean even in the work
that I do where I'm working with
somebody where apparently I'm creating
transformation for people I I won't do
it unless there's a question
and I won't impose my ideas on if
somebody wants help transforming their
lives great help them
but to impose your idea it's incredibly
hubris
it's incredible to think that like oh I
I know what's better for the person and
more specifically than that is every way
that you want somebody else to change is
really just a reflection of a way that
you don't want to feel right because
they do that thing and it makes me feel
X
right so if it's like if every time
somebody yelled at you you felt like a
million bucks you really wouldn't care
if they yelled at you
right if every time somebody
um was late to dinner it made you feel
loved and adored you'd be like cool be
late to dinner
so what's really happening is that
you're saying I don't want to feel a
certain way and you're making me feel it
so you're holding them emotionally
responsible which is totally
disempowering to yourself to yourself
right and you're trying to control them
which is disempowering to them it's just
a horrible
situation and so take responsibility for
your own emotions and the best way to do
that is to say how am I going to respond
it sounds like you're mostly exploring
this in terms of interpersonal
relationships like romantic
relationships but I imagine this comes
up a lot in a work context and The Traps
seem similar it's like somebody's like
feeling like they really need this job
but you really want them to be different
if they're going to be on the team yes
so I will say that if you look at the
way that the boundaries are held whether
it's the way Martin Luther King held
boundaries or a great CEO how boundaries
or hold you how you how you hold
boundaries
in a work context or in a love
relationship it's the principles are
very much the same
the thing about a work context is that
at some point there is like this moment
of control of like I'm going to fire you
I'm going to let you go
um which is really not this is what I'm
gonna do it I am going to fire you is
what I'm going to do but it has like you
are forcing somebody out of a situation
apparently forcing them out
usually when people are clear about
their boundaries up front
there is no firing of anybody they just
leave
and it's really clear and we've talked
about this Brett and I that like the
last four five people that have we've
let go in our company literally I go to
have the walk with them to say this
isn't working and they they say it's
time for me to go it's like oddly like
disturbingly the case I had some client
recently asked me was like is that
because you're too slow letting people
go and made me think about that
um but it feels like it's the right time
for me it feels like it's the right time
for them and it's because I'm constantly
drawing these boundaries saying hey like
this is
this is the expectation and if this
can't happen then this is this is what's
going to occur and so
and this is what I'm going to do to
respond to it I'm very clear about my
own wants and I'm very clear about
expectations and so it usually doesn't
come down to that but that's the the
unique part of the work
stuff is to is that you can eventually
say you're fired or be fired but the
thing for the person who's having the
boundary drawn is there's it's always
about the fear of a consequence that
prevents somebody from drawing the
boundary
and so I can't say that to my boss
because they might fire me
I can't say that to my lover because
they might leave I can't right which is
basically I can't be myself and be
accepted here is really what you're
saying or I'm scared
and the interesting thing about that
reflection is it's usually based on
their projection of the way the world
works
a great example of this is I get a
conversation with people a lot that goes
something to the effect of
I think I'm going to quit my job I think
I'm going to break up
and I'll say well what's wrong and
they'll talk about it I'm like well what
if you were just yourself let's see what
happens
so since you're gonna quit and you're
going to break up anyways like we just
assume that it's already lost so why
don't you just show up exactly how you
want to be at work
and see what happens
and literally eight out of 10 times
they get promoted they get raises they
their relationship turned up great
twenty percent of the time they get
fired they're like yeah you know and
nope that's really not what they wanted
but eight eighty percent of the time it
was their projection of the world that
they were scared of not actually the
world
and and for the 20 that have gone fired
none of them are like oh [__] I got
fired they did what they did instead was
they're like oh or I got or I got broken
up with but they're like oh this is how
I want to be that means this is the kind
of company I want to work for yeah so
we're scared of the consequence but
whatever the consequence is it is a
direct path to the life where we are
accepted and loved for who we are I love
that yeah I like the way I said it I
don't think I've ever said it that well
it just feels so good and so exciting
then to set boundaries right yeah
exactly until you actually go to set
them and then it's just there's a real
big scary moment often because
so for instance the other thing that
that's interesting about boundaries is
that they move
so I and I think I've said this as an
example so my dad was a drinker and I
started with the boundary with him
of
I'm not going to be around you
and then it was I'm not going to be
around you when you're drinking
around you when you're behaving in a
certain way because of drinking
and those are my boundaries and it was
about me not being around him and each
one of them allowed me to love him
better but it was really important for
me to have that really big strict
boundary at the beginning of just I'm
not going to be around you because I
needed to convince myself that it was
okay for me not to be around that person
right so if there's an abusive
relationship whether it's emotional or
physical the first step is that the
person has to be convinced that they
don't deserve it
that it's not their fault
that they are worthy of a deeper love
and and that is what helps you draw the
boundary and that boundary is what
confirms that
and so but that moment is really scary
to actually draw it the first time
because you're still not sure if you
deserve that love like you you don't
know if the world's going to provide for
you because your whole life it hasn't
and so there is this great moment of
fear when you're drawing especially
important big boundaries
is I this big feeling of vulnerability
because you're you're testing to see if
the world is going to work the way that
that your projections say it's going to
work and if it doesn't then man your
whole self-definition has to has to bend
and be reshaped and so it gets scary so
it's actually scary either way it's
scary if your boundary is sort of
accepted and the person loves you in
your boundary because then that means
that your the way that you have modeled
the world in the past has to now change
yes and that means you have to change
yeah and it also means that you have to
grieve the fact that you've been living
under a cage that was never [__]
there right and who you think you were
and what you define yourself as yeah
boundaries and apologies
are some of the most effective change
agents for for healing transformation
because it it's their like direct tests
about what how you see the world yeah
and when your model of the world changes
so many things can change can we really
feel really destabilizing even though
it's growthful and if your model of the
world changes then
inevitably your model of yourself that I
did what you how you limit yourself
changes absolutely yeah yeah
so right before we did this you said to
me there's like really there was just
one question that everybody was asking
yeah on the online they're like there's
lots of people were asking questions
about boundaries but one there's kind of
one question what is the one question
that they're all so it takes two forms
the one the question the rose to the top
was what is the difference between a
boundary and an ultimatum ah yeah and
the other one is just how do you know if
you're setting good boundaries which I
think are basically the same thing yeah
but it's nice that they're reflected in
two different ways because the second
one I think we've answered pretty well
it's like you're not asking them to
change and you're and you're and it
increases your love the not asking them
to change can still feel like an
ultimatum and it can still be a power
over them
but not if it increases your capacity to
love and so the ultimatum part is
it's really when our boundaries sound
like ultimatums it means that we're
really scared that we're operating out
of the fear because we're trying to
control the other person in One Way or
Another and so there's a subtlety of it
and I think you heard it in my first
example of a boundary which was and I'll
be gone for 30 minutes and I will call
you then and if you're able to not
so
what I'm doing there is I'm not
abandoning the person
and so oftentimes if you are going to
stick with the
it increases your love and it's not what
they're going to do to just completely
make sure that you're not creating an
ultimatum that you're not in a power
struggle
you want to make sure that there's no
abandonment in it either
um an abandonment this is a weird thing
because the abandonment is is like
doesn't mean that you're going to be
there for them
but it does mean that you they have a
choice to get back into connection with
you so the choice is don't yell at me
and then we can be in connection
if you say I'm done with your yelling
I'm leaving it's it's a boundary you
it's not going to increase your capacity
to love them and it can be very much in
power over a situation but if you leave
that opening that says hey
you know I will do business with you in
the future if
you know this and this and this happen
then there's a door open there's a way
for that to to continue now sometimes
it's really necessary to not give an
opening
both for your own healing or you know so
for instance if I saw somebody embezzled
money from me there wouldn't be like a
and when you
can show that you're honest again I will
be open and reflective it's just I don't
want to do business with anybody who
stole from me and so that's a choice I
get to make and I'm going to make it and
is that an ultimate I'm absolutely it's
an ultimatum it's not even an ultimatum
there's not even a choice there's just
like leave
or I'm leaving
um
and I think that's absolutely fine as
well but notice in that case I'm not
kind of trying to control them I'm just
saying this isn't a relationship I want
to be a part of
so the prince of the underlying
principle is the same I'm still not
trying to control another person
I might try to try to control them to
get my money back
from the embezzlement
um and again but that that's not the
boundary so I'm I wonder are you saying
that boundaries are never a way to try
to control someone or change someone
correct that's right
that's a false errand yeah I want to ask
what makes it a Fool's errand
it was the the things we talked about
before
um the idea that it's not empowering to
you and it's not empowering to them and
there's a great saying it's like moving
a mountain or changing a man I'd rather
move a mountain it's easier
yeah yeah so there are
there are some things that come up in
life where I mean I think a work context
is a really good one or like you're on a
team with someone you have a shared
project a shared resource of some kind
maybe you're living together in a group
house and you're both paying into the
lease and so if to leave
is like very disruptive to both of your
lives how do you set boundaries in those
kinds of situations that aren't
ultimatums so give me a specific example
and then we'll we'll see if we can come
up with it let's try a couple of
iterations of this because I'm not sure
if I have come up with a good one there
was one that was on my mind earlier in
this conversation that was like in a
work context if you're like I'm
constantly triggered that you like I
something like that you're defensive
like I can't work with your
defensiveness right and that's about
them but at a certain point if if you
have power to be like
we just can't work on this team together
so in that context there's first like
kind of the view conversation before any
boundary is necessary to just learn
right it's like okay so I noticed that
certain things are hap when certain
things happen you get defensive what
does that mean for you
what what's triggering that
how do you see me in those moments like
so there's a whole bunch of
conversations so you can just start to
understand
the defensiveness there's also like I've
seen CEOs do this uh with their
executive team it's like oh wow you're
being defensive we've talked about that
I need you to uh leave the conversation
until you can come back in a
non-defensive way and will and will make
decisions without you
the thing is like you need to leave the
conversation is it's something like I
said that you can do that at work which
is interesting but the non-version of
that is I'm I don't want to engage in a
conversation with you like if this is in
a house I don't want to engage in a
conversation with you that's defensive
so I'm totally happy to re-engage with
you when this conversation isn't
defensive
and which point they'll probably say I'm
not being defensive
[Laughter]
and um that would be the typical
response to that and then you would say
it feels very much like it's defensive
to me right now and I don't want to
engage in that you don't have to justify
you're not going to get into a court of
law with the person
because you get the choice to whether
you're going to engage in a defensive
conversation or not you know that's the
choice that you get to make yeah the
other thing that I love about what
you're saying is
like I'm realizing that any probably any
need want could be expressed in terms of
a boundary yeah but that's just not
like usually the best tool for every
kind of interaction It's usually the
last case scenario tool and it usually
means there's some place like that can
use some healing in you too
but sometimes the boundary is the best
way to heal it
so it's an interesting Paradox there it
you know so if someone it's usually
someplace where someone gets really
triggered so if somebody's defensive
with me for instance I might ask about
it I might laugh at it I might promote
it you know I might be like I'd be like
you know
with a big smile on my face go
absolutely not that's not true at all
that's you know like and I like and I
like because I don't really if someone
gets defensive to the most part I don't
really mind I I notice I get a little
trigger when people are defense
defensive if it like shuts down a group
because I noticed that like when
someone's defensive in a group it shuts
down the group and that'll actually get
me a little bit more but one-on-one it
it doesn't and
and so it's usually something in that
that like if you can't play with it
there's something in you that needs to
oh I don't have to be around defensive
people I don't have to do that and as
soon as you know you don't have to then
the boundary immediately changes and
becomes like more nuanced yeah like so
with my dad it was I'm not going to be
around you and then once I realize that
oh I don't have to be around as drinking
but but I miss my dad I like to be
around my dad okay I'm gonna be around
my dad just not while he's drinking
oh I don't really mind that he's
drinking as long as he's not being a
prick okay you know but I had to learn
that I could not be around a string and
that's why the boundary was such like a
huge tool
um another example of this for me was
when I was you know earlier on when I
was teaching and coaching I
felt like I I held a little bit too much
responsibility for other people and so
when people started to like not trust
the process
I would feel like responsible to make
sure that they were taken care of
I had to draw the boundary of like oh if
you don't trust the process then I'm not
in the process with you anymore
and that's not because I don't love you
it's because the process doesn't work if
there's no trust
so
I'm happy to address the trust I'm happy
to have whatever conversation we need to
have but if there's no trust on your
side
they would be as stupid as me continuing
the process if I didn't trust that you
could transform that would be ridiculous
like the you like the trust needs to be
there and I had to draw that boundary
with several clients to get to the point
where
now
it that boundary gets drawn so early
that it never seems to get to that point
anymore right where it's just so early
like oh I see that there's not trust
here
and
and that doesn't I don't want to work
like that
and then they'll be like oh okay well
this is why I don't trust you great and
then we're talking about whereas before
it was
okay what do I have to do to help them
it would just never worked oh
interesting that brings up another
question that I had and I don't know see
if you want to go into this or not
um but it was
from what you were saying earlier I
wondered is resentment always a pointer
to a boundary that's not being drawn
yeah there's two ways to think about
resentment one of the ways is to say
that you're trying to it's a really good
indicator that you're trying to save
other people
in the in the fear triangle it's like
the Savior holds a lot of the resentment
and obligation
and what that really is is that you're
trying to make your world The Way You
Want It by Saving other people by making
sure other people are happy and so
there's a lot of resentment that gets
built there and
so absolutely there's a boundary that
they're not drawing right the thing
about a savior is that a savior
tries to make the other person happy
instead of having the boundary of you
know this is how I want to be around you
but to see every time you resent it as a
boundary that's
a boundary that needs to be drawn can be
a little bit dangerous because it uses
like the Bazooka of the tools pretty
early instead of just saying like I
don't want to do that you know I don't
want to do the dishes you know every
night I want or I want to do the dishes
together I would love to do the dishes
with you right and so
there's so many places where resentment
is just an indicator also just what are
the wants that you haven't expressed
what's the vision of the world that you
want to live in that you haven't
expressed because you don't think you
can get it so which is like you said
another way to say that it's like a
boundary but it might not need to be a
like a
kablamo boundary it can just be like a
what I really want is for us to enjoy
doing the dishes together and have fun
doing dishes together instead of why
aren't you doing the dishes you know or
if you don't do the dishes and I'm not
going to do the dishes and
there's so many solutions to the problem
I on the dish thing I just I always love
this I always think about this
particular example
um there's a guy I know who lived with
his
um friends and none of them want to do
to do the dishes and it was like all
this hardship in the dishes and so
this was their solution to the problem
after sitting down and like everybody's
saying what they wanted they went and
got two huge Rubbermaid trash cans and
they filled them with like water and a
little bit of bleach and they went to
the
like Goodwill and they bought all the
cheap dishes they could buy
and they every time they were done with
their dishes they just put them in these
two Rubbermaid trash cans outside
with all the bleach and uh like once a
month they would like put soap in and
like wash it with like a sprayer and
like they all did dishes once a month on
the driveway I mean kind of gross but
also awesome like there's like there's
that many solutions to the dish problem
that is like haunting half of the
marriages in the United States you know
what I mean and instead we sit there and
try to [__] control each other it's
it's kind of silly yeah yeah one thing
that's really coming up for me in this
discussion is the idea that um because I
am really like
worried about or I should really say
triggered by what I see as sort of the
weaponization of the concept of
boundaries me too I think it happens a
lot around sort of the periphery I guess
of these communities yeah
um it keeps coming up for me in this
conversation like oh how could I how
could I talk about this but that example
is pointing at something that I think is
going on with a lot of the weaponization
of boundaries is sort of like somebody
has decided that they know the way yes I
know how to fix this problem I'm having
a problem I know what the solution is
so I'm going to say that this is my
boundary so that you do it the way that
I want you to do it right yeah and so
there's like a little bit of a lack of
ownership of what it is that they want
that if you could lead instead with the
what you want or what your need is you
know that maybe there's a much larger
solution space that's possible yeah and
and oftentimes what I notice in modern
society is it's around like they'll use
safety as the thing the boundary will be
about safety so it'll be I don't feel
safe and therefore everybody has to
change to make me feel safe
and there's a way in which
having people feel safe is really great
and important and it allows us all to
thrive and there is a way in which
life is inherently unsafe and so if you
want other people if other people if you
need other people to make you feel safe
you will never feel safe the only way
you can feel safe is to learn how to
create safety for yourself
and obviously
don't go live in a war zone because it's
unsafe right so it's like this
interesting what seems like a paradox
um and so what I notice is with all of
these things
something let's say safety
safety becomes a way to control others
and boundaries can become a way to
control others and and oftentimes you'll
notice in those boundaries they're
asking someone to be different
they're asking them to do a different
Behavior and the reason the
psychological reason behind that is
so you'll see this everywhere is that
the abused becomes the abuser and it
seems like it's a Natural Evolution for
people to move out of an abuse cycle
um but you'll see it in countries
countries that got deeply abused then
start abusing and you'll see it in
kids who were abused
you know
often abuse their kids or kids that are
bullied at home bully at school like
you'll see this kind of passing down of
the abuse cycle and that's what happens
is like as somebody is feeling
disempowered they think the way to get
to empowerment is to control other
people and and then they use
well I would call it topping from the
bottom they they
use their victimhood as a way to
dominate other people
and empowerment isn't
as we've discussed in early in these
podcasts empowerment is
being yourself despite the consequences
you don't you never feel empowerment by
having power because power can be taken
away from you
so there's no way that you feel safe
because you have enough power you know I
I know billionaires who don't feel safe
I know you know heads of state that
don't feel safe
so safety empowerment is that internal
understanding that I'm going to be
truthful despite the consequences
so I think that's that's where that
stems from is that the that they're
still in the power cycle they're just
trying to get the power instead of being
powered over but but the solution is
empowerment and that's why
something like Gandhi worked for the
time that it was working
um or Martin Luther King is because that
those movements were about empowerment
the the movements weren't about having
power over somebody else and when you
see the movements are we want to have
power over somebody else that's when
one group of
dictators
gets replaced with another group of
dictators with a different philosophy
but it's the and it's the same thing as
one abuser gets replaced with another
abuser inside of a relationship two
different pathways are presenting
themselves in my mind yeah so one is
if you find yourself on the receiving
end of gosh or the giving end if you
find yourself in a dynamic where there's
sort of this tapping from the bottom
kind of use of safety or boundaries how
do you respond it's actually a really
tricky one in a in a context of of
coaching I I'll say you seem pissed tell
me all about it like I will elicit the
anger that's underneath it
if that doesn't elicit the anger
underneath it I will
call them out in such a way that um
that shows that the victim that that
they're topping from the bottom and then
they really do get pissed so
um you'll notice that anybody who's
doing that kind of like
um aggressive what I call the aggressive
victim stance and you call them out on
it
they get really pissed at you then then
they get really and then you get to see
what's really Underneath It All Which is
far more beautiful for me than that in a
business context and a non-coaching
context if I see that that's what's
happening I will
um I'll call it out I'll call it out
I'll say something to the effect of like
um I don't want to be in a power Dynamic
with you and I and I don't agree to be
your bully I don't agree to be the
person who's oppressing you
I'll just say it directly like that like
I'm not going to buy into a situation
where you're not empowered and able to
do what you want to do and I'm not able
empowered to do what I want to do
and I'm not interested in any
relationship where we're trying to
change each other
kind of sounds like a boundary yeah it's
just exactly and what happens to the
dynamic
um sometimes people get angry or leave
or we we're not in an interaction
anymore and sometimes people see the
freedom in it and they're like
a deep loyalty and trust is born because
we're meeting each other as humans not
as objects to be controlled not as ways
to achieve power with each other
in teams it's incredibly amazing you see
teams where there's an idea that there's
some power structure
and
there's a control structure and there
should be an organization meaning that
some people need to be in control of
certain decisions and make those
decisions or man nothing ever happens
um
but if there's the power dynamics where
there's fear happening and then people
are trying to feel safe through having
power over or influence over other
people
you'll just see that
that's just a super dysfunctional team
they get pretty functional and but they
die quick and it doesn't last very long
yeah you have to have a really good
product in high margins and
good patents to pull off a business like
that
um the thing I noticed you didn't talk
about was like in an interpersonal
non-coaching relationship like a
romantic relationship a shared house I I
don't I don't tend to have relationships
with people who like to top from the
bottom
um in the in my personal World
[Music]
um
but let me just think yeah the last time
that that happened
um
I eventually created separation I
eventually said like in that particular
case I talked about it and then they
weren't wanting to or willing to see it
I think it's really hard for someone
who's in the aggressive victim thing
for them to see that that's what's
happening
because they're so defined as the victim
it's very hard for them to see that
they're
that that it's very hard if they stop
putting you in the oppressor roll
it's really really hard for them
to see that they might might be the
abuser in the situation or be might be
part of the abuse cycle in the situation
and it happened that those abuses can be
really subtle it can be like
you know it's usually the aggressive
victim does things like shows up late
all the time or says the little snarky
comment in front of other folks or
um refuses to change while we agreed
that this is how it's going to be so I'm
never going to change on this topic like
um there's all sorts of little things
that they do they become incredibly
indecisive to so that the other person
can't move freely there's all sorts of
things but all but our society so much
sees those people as
the victim that needs to be saved
whereas the person who's yelling and
doing that kind of thing or who's like
come on God damn it like without they're
the bad guy
and so there's like a societal Norm that
makes one of them that guy I'm one of
them the victim and the poor person
poor person who's this is being done too
so I just don't
I don't usually interact with either
bullies or victims
very much on a personal life in a
personal life so I have a question
that coming directly off of this sounds
one way and the other way it sounds is
like how can we somatically tell in
ourselves whether we're having a good
boundary or not
so the way it sounds off of this topic
is like okay say you find yourself in a
situation where you
are in that fear where you
have been I don't know maybe using
boundaries badly or you're tempted to
use a boundary badly yeah um to control
someone you know what do you do though
there's the feeling of fear there's a
feeling of expansion when the boundaries
creates deeper love so
the somatically you will feel that love
you will feel that expansion so that's
how you know it for your first question
and then the second question is um
play experiment do bad boundaries and
when you do them say I'm sorry I was
trying to control you that's not how I
want to be with you
like you're not going to get it perfect
so [__] it off
mess it up screw up blah blah blah and
then apologize and and let that apology
be one without shame that's heartfelt
and then it'll be harder and harder for
you to do bad boundaries apologies are
really useful that way if you really
give a heartfelt non-shame based apology
it's a great way to modify Behavior
so yeah it's just like we all are going
to mess up we're all gonna get scared
and we're gonna think we're drawing a
boundary that we're actually trying to
control somebody else
but it's amazing if you can say to
somebody I noticed I was trying to
control you and that's not what I want
to do it's not the relationship I want
to be in with you
how much people want to hear that and
how much trust that builds yeah
I feel like boundaries can can be really
inspiring so is there a story you know
of of where you know somebody coming
into their empowerment and setting a
boundary had you know beautiful results
yeah it's not I don't have a story I
have like infinite stories of this
um
I cannot tell you how many people this
this story happened has happened to
which is they're in a relationship
they've fully bought into the fact that
they're responsible
for somebody else's emotional state that
they're they're constantly looking what
did I do what do I need to learn to make
this relationship better
and then they draw the boundary and the
relationship just immediately either
ends or changes
like it just either immediately the
relationship is done and they're free of
it
um I remember we had somebody here
living on the property and
my relationship with that person was
good and
um and my wife's relationship was not
and she didn't feel good that she could
you know put my relationship with this
person in damage or
didn't feel like she had the right to
ask or blah blah and then literally the
moment she did it the person was like
off the property and I felt relief and
she felt relief
and I'm sure the person who left you
know felt relief as well so I I can't
tell you how many times that it's either
gone that way or the person who has been
kind of the abuser feels the relief is
like oh good I don't want that
relationship either
just the other day I was talking to a
client and she was saying
she had a good friend and I remembered
the story from like two years ago
and it was just kind of this passive
aggressive shitty friendship but they
had been friends for so long and
and at some point you know the woman
said like came to her and said um I've
been caretaking you
and I'm not gonna caretake you anymore
I'm gonna be really honest and
straightforward with you and there's a
way in which you've been mean to me like
you resentful of me and I don't
understand why or how you could be
resentful to me but I don't want a
relationship where we have resentment I
don't I'm not I don't want to be a part
of that
and their relationship like just from
that single conversation completely
transformed and they are
and the woman who it was said to she
said you know I was angry at you and I
just couldn't tell why I didn't know
what was going on but as soon as you
said that to me it just all dropped
like I was resentful for the caretaking
and I just like you weren't treating me
like an equal
and now that we are it's like it's just
wonderful I can't tell you how many like
that happens all the time
it really makes you question is it is
the thing about the boundary that's
scariest the freedom that we get on the
other side
yeah yeah there we go
the whole thing that came up for me that
I still I don't know how to handle it
um was around when I was living in this
group house and
um there was some tension with me in
another housemate and then a a different
housemate than that was like I can't
have this kind of tension in my house I
need you to fix this or else I'm gonna
leave and that's just my boundary it was
a boundary that wasn't done out of love
but it was done without trying to
control you guys which is interesting
right right yeah I find it really
complicated and
um what I was noticing during our talk
is like okay well one of the things that
was sort of happening there is like well
it was really constricted and like I
know that I when I come at people with
constriction around my wants it doesn't
land well yeah and that that's I think
that's how the boundary and the whole
thing of like that's just my boundary
got used there was like so be that
person for a minute and I'll be
I will just like kind of set the how I
would potentially handle it okay okay
so you're we'll call you Joan yeah okay
so you're Alexa
yeah I'm Alexa yeah okay yeah
I just got a lot more attractive
yeah but also now your name is a trigger
word for everybody else okay can you
turn down the music
Okay so
um
Alexa there's just so much tension in
this household right now and it just
makes me feel really unsafe I can't be
like planning a future with people who
are going to have this much tension and
I know you can fix it and I just I
really need you to fix it or else I'm
gonna leave I can't stay in this kind of
a household
right
it is a [__] [__] ton of tension and
it sucks and I don't want it either
and I don't know if I know how to fix it
I really appreciate your confidence in
me to be able to fix it
and I would love any insight you have
that would allow me to fix it and not
feel like I am
like I am compromising who I am in the
process
I already feel a difference like from
how I responded where I was also
constricted like no to put all this on
me
it's not on me their fear in that moment
Their Fear was that their their boundary
wasn't going to get respected
that they had to be firm or they were
going to be run over that was their fear
and so as soon as I feel that fear in
somebody
I can just I can empathize with that
fear and be like yeah and I can I let
them know that they're seen wow it's
great I mean the other thing that was
going on for me I'm just noticing is
like yeah
foreign
judging myself in real time right now is
feeling like well that's not fair like
tension happens you know it's your it's
your own trauma and it's your own story
that's
causing it to feel unsafe to you
and it's not my it's not my job to like
fix it
for you that's right all that is really
really true hmm and I appreciate that
but I wish I could respond in a way
that's just like
so like you know yours is so like oh I
really
love how much Faith you have in me or
I'm like I can't do that I can't
aren't they all right I know you can fix
it I mean that is faith in you
and so maybe your authenticity in that
moment needs to also say and
I definitely don't want to fix this
tension to make you happy
yeah I want to fix this I do want to fix
this tension but I definitely don't want
to fix this tension to make you happy
and I definitely don't want to feel like
I have to keep you happy to keep you to
stay
because that would just be a crappy
relationship
it would be so much resentment yes
absolutely so and that's the thing like
what what you heard what I said you're
like ah something and you relaxed and
then something and you was still like
and listening to that eh is
the way that you get to that the next
level of clarity
oh yeah but there's still something
there it's like
and then how do you say that in an
undefended way of not trying to change
them ah yeah
yeah it's really good so to tie this
back into the podcast recording that we
just did like at the very end your
examples of great boundaries seemed kind
of I was surprised it seems kind of
scary you're like yeah it was great it
ended that relationship that person left
and my experience of boundaries
especially through work with you is
things that are a lot more subtle it's
like
Brett kind of has a boundary with me of
like I need you to not stop me from base
jumping
you know not try to stop me and I'm like
okay I was gonna ask that question at
the beginning your boundaries are on
base jumping well one that came out well
that's you immediately that's what he's
asking you to do something and one that
came out for me
from that is like
like I want to be supportive of you and
also I'm not gonna shut down my fear
and my feelings
you know to make you feel safe yeah
great and stating that boundary felt
like oh there's so much more openness
here like I can be who I am and how I am
but it's not it's not like as it's scary
it's scary to say but it's not as scary
as your examples yeah I gave extreme
examples your examples that example is
beautiful I love that example
I hope to use it in the future
great yeah and and it felt to me a
minute ago that there was something that
was stitching all this together
it sounds to me like something that's
emerging for me from this conversation
boundaries actually are pretty scary for
a lot of people to set and to hear
and then those boundaries that you are
coming
to an interaction with a lot of
constriction have more potential I think
for something kind of damaging because
like what ended up happening with my
house is that I did kind of shut down in
this way of like well if you're coming
at me like that like I don't
it makes me actually not want this
relationship and not want this household
to work and it did fall apart I mean
they left and right and that's the love
thing
that's the like oh immediately puts me
into more love no matter what their
response is that's what that pointer is
indicating
is to drop the defense it's like that if
you if you draw a boundary as a form of
like is a way to defend yourself you're
in you're in the fight
you're in the back and forth you're in
the the fear triangle you're in the
power dynamic
and it's that fear that and it might be
a really good pointer to put into it
which is the the fear is that there's
this fear that I'm not gonna be able to
hold my boundary that really really
makes boundaries come up wonky as [__]
yeah yeah you're absolutely right yeah
if you 100 knew that it's like oh I'm
not gonna put up with this you know like
I'm not I don't want to live with this
kind of fighting and you are 100 sure of
it and you knew you deserved it it would
sound like this
hey guys I don't want to live with this
like and so how do we fix it so I don't
have to
and so I don't have to leave because I
really love being with you guys
otherwise
yeah I really think there's something to
that yeah which is ties into that it's
the internal work
to like feel empowered and to know that
you're worth it it all
it all like once you really feel
empowered and you really trust yourself
that you can stay at a boundary and it
doesn't even land in anyone as a
boundary correct and you don't want to
say that to people because then they're
gonna give have an excuse never to say
they're boundary because it they still
well once I figure it out because
especially the people who have a hard
time drawing the boundaries are the
people who think they have to be perfect
all the time to be valuable enough to
have a boundary yeah yeah I definitely
see your point there yeah so you gotta
practice it but there's still
thing right like the the people who are
saying something like and that's just my
boundary right then that's a pointer
that there's something constricted there
yeah that they're scared I mean it's all
fear
if you can see it all as fear then like
everybody's boundary and your own
boundary is just it's just sweetness
it's like oh everyone's scared yeah like
I see a big like just dealing recently
with a
um high level executive and there was
like this big fight in the company and
as you know I kept on coming back to can
you just see everybody is scared like
just scared powerful people
throwing big temper tantrums that's like
and as soon as you can see it man it's
just so easy to see through and navigate
yeah awesome okay all right that was
good thanks for listening to the art of
accomplishment if you enjoyed what you
heard today please subscribe and rate US
on your podcast app we'd love your
feedback so feel free to send us
questions or comments you can reach out
to us join our newsletter or check out
our courses at Art of accomplishment.com
[Music]
foreign